DOCS-544: Program Robots section refactor (#1364)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/program/run.md

---
title: "Run SDK Code"
linkTitle: "Run Code"
weight: 50
type: "docs"
description: "Execute the logic you've written to control your robot or fleet."

> icon: "/services/img/icons/sdk.svg"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
images: [ "/services/img/icons/sdk.svg" ]
```

Author: Done

tags: ["client", "sdk", "application"]
---

> After saving your boilerplate code sample and adding control logic with Viam's API methods, run your program to control your Viam-connected robot.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to link this to somewhere?  Many might jump to this page and not know what this boilerplate code sample is (and do we want to use the word boilerplate or just code sample?)

> Do this by running a command to execute the program in the terminal of a machine with the appropriate programming language and Viam SDK installed.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this was covered previously?  Is this page meant to repeat that, or is it supposed to be about running your code in different ways (connecting over the web vs locally, etc)?

Reviewer: It's providing context for what you will have done before getting to this page.

For example:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
python3 ~/myCode/myViamFile.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go run ~/myCode/myViamFile.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

For an example, see [this execution demo.](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-typescript-sdk/tree/main/examples/vanilla)

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="C++" %}}

For information on running C++ code see [the instructions on GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-cpp-sdk/blob/main/BUILDING.md).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> If you are connecting to your robot through an external signaling address, as is the case in the boilerplate code samples generated by the Viam app, you can perform this step on any computer.

Reviewer 2: I think we should explain why this is useful as the default - as many might say "external signaling address, huh?"

Author: @mcvella Good point, but is the usefulness not clear from the second sentence? I think the below suggestion makes it a bit repetitive

Author: Example of external use case or address? @npentrel

Reviewer: of an external signaling address

Author: Done!

> As long as this computer is able to establish a network connection with the robot's computer, the control logic will be executed on the robot.

Author: ```suggestion
This is useful because as long as this computer is able to establish a network connection with the robot's computer, the control logic will be executed on the robot.
```

### Run Code Locally

If you need to run [PID control loops](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller) or other on-robot code, you can run control code on the same board that is running `viam-server`.

> To ensure intermittent internet connectivity does not interfere with the code's execution, there are some special steps you need to follow:

Reviewer 2: OK, so honest question - I often run code locally on my robot just so I don't need my laptop to always be up and running etc - but in many cases the robot is in a place of good network connectivity so I don't take these special steps.  Should we be telling people to do this whenever they are running the code on the robot, or just if they think their robot will sometimes lose connectivity etc?

Author: @npentrel Might have a better idea than I do but I think "ensure" is the key word, so we could add a note explaining that this is only necessary if you think your robot will sometimes lose connectivity?

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}

> Currently, this only works with Python code which is running on the same board that `viam-server` is running on.

Reviewer 2: I heard a rumor this might not even be required anymore btw - can we verify, and verify if it already works properly with other SDKs (like go - and by properly meaning it will automatically try to connect direct locally if internet is not available)

Author: @npentrel Tried to track down this ticket and could not find it, but I think you added this info in-- Do either of you know for sure, or have any advice as to who to reach out to to verify support here on Eng.?

Author: Unfortunately I don't know anything as to why the note is up

Reviewer 2: I got clarification on this from Max - this is still required in this use-case, so ignore my comment.  Not sure about other language SDKs

Do this by running a command to execute the program in the terminal of a machine with the appropriate programming language and Viam SDK installed.

For example:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
python3 ~/myCode/myViamFile.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go run ~/myCode/myViamFile.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

For an example, see [this execution demo.](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-typescript-sdk/tree/main/examples/vanilla)

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="C++" %}}

For information on running C++ code see [the instructions on GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-cpp-sdk/blob/main/BUILDING.md).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

If you are connecting to your robot through an external signaling address, you can perform this step on any computer.

This is useful because as long as your computer is able to establish a network connection with the robot's computer, your control logic will be executed on the robot.

> The robot Viam cloud address in the code sample generated by the Viam app is an example of connecting to the robot through an external or public address: for example, [`12345.somerobot-main.viam.cloud`].

Author: ```suggestion
The Viam cloud robot address in the code sample generated by the Viam app, which should look like [`12345.somerobot-main.viam.cloud`], is an example of connecting to the robot through an external or public address.
```

Select **Include Secret** on the **Code sample** tab to make the code sample include the robot location secret, which is necessary to authenticate to the robot at that address.

> ### Run Code Locally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Run Code On-Robot
```
Locally is a relative term, and most might think locally means on their local machine (like a laptop)

Author: @mcvella oh that's a good point, done

If you need to run [PID control loops](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller) or other on-robot code, you can run control code on the same board that is running `viam-server`.

In case your robots have intermittent internet connectivity, you can ensure this does not interfere with the code's execution, by following these steps:

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
Currently, this only works with Python code which is running on the same board that `viam-server` is running on.
{{< /alert >}}

1. Change the `connect()` method to disable {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="webrtc" >}} and add the auth_entity in the DialOptions and use `localhost:8080`:

>     ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="5"}

Reviewer 2: Why is line 5 highlighted?

Author: This was a Naomi ticket but I think to show what to do re. line 60, DialOptions @mcvella

    async def connect():
      creds = Credentials(type='robot-location-secret', payload=PAYLOAD_SECRET)
      opts = RobotClient.Options(
        refresh_interval=0,
        dial_options=DialOptions(
            credentials=creds,
            disable_webrtc=True,
            auth_entity=ROBOT_NAME
        )
      )
      return await RobotClient.at_address('localhost:8080', opts)
    ```

> 2. Replace the `ROBOT_NAME` with your robot's Viam cloud address and the `PAYLOAD_SECRET` with your robot secret.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to cover this here as this is not specific to running code locally on-robot

Author: @mcvella This code is from Naomi's ticket moved over, but I agree it's now redundant. Actually taking a bit of time to look over this whole section now, will ping you when ready for re-review!

Reviewer: Step three isn't specific to this? I thought changing to localhost is a requirement

go run ~/myCode/myViamFile.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

For an example, see [this execution demo.](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-typescript-sdk/tree/main/examples/vanilla)

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="C++" %}}

For information on running C++ code see [the instructions on GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-cpp-sdk/blob/main/BUILDING.md).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

This is useful because as long as that computer is able to establish a network connection with the robot's computer, your control logic will be executed on the robot.

### Authentication

You must reference a robot's location secret to authenticate yourself to the robot.
However, the app hides the robot location secret from the sample by default for your security.

To copy the robot location secret, select **Include Secret** on the **Code sample** tab of your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Paste it into your SDK code as directed by the code sample.

You must also include the robot's remote address, like `12345.somerobot-main.viam.cloud`, as an external or public address to connect to your robot.

> The code sample should include this address at default, but if not, find it displayed on the robot's **Control** tab.

Author: ```suggestion
The code sample should include this address at default.
You can find it at the top of the robot's **Control** tab.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

If you are connecting to your robot through an external signaling address, you can perform this step on any computer.

This is useful because as long as your computer is able to establish a network connection with the robot's computer, your control logic will be executed on the robot.

> The code sample generated by the Viam app includes a Viam cloud address like [`12345.somerobot-main.viam.cloud`] as an external or public address to connect to your robot .

Reviewer: Why the brackets? 
```suggestion
The code sample generated by the Viam app includes a Viam cloud address like `12345.somerobot-main.viam.cloud` as an external or public address to connect to your robot .
```
